Well, after we'd set this thing up, I went off back
to the Admiralty. And a month or so, I went over to
have a look at it. It was rather like Henry VIII
visiting Trinity. You know, the founder come to
visit the thing. And the people were all quite
enthusiastic about it, because they'd otherwise
have been fighting in the Battle of the Bulwark.
And it was really, really great fun. The first time
I went over, it was foggy and the Air Force couldn't
take us over. I got on to the operations at Dover and
said, look, can you take us over to France? They
said, sure. And we were actually the first, we went
over in a motor torpedo boat, and we were the first
vessel into Boulogne after it was liberated,
after the Germans got out. It was interesting to
see a place that we were the first people into.
Nothing had been done, just as left by the Germans.
All the port destroyed, everything blown up. and
then we went back to paris and along the roads of
course where all the bridges were blown
everything was wrecked and then then we worked our
way we got into brussels just after it was
liberated wonderful with all the rejoicings of
the liberation the the capture we were got in just
after the capture of the luftwaffe's wine cellar
by the second technical air force we did very well
there and then we set up advanced headquarters in
Berlin. We had all kinds of organizations, really
great fun, and not very serious, of course. Well,
then when the German war was over, I decided I
really didn't want to sit out the Japanese war as
well. So I went back to Cambridge in, I think, the
war ended in August. Yes, beginning of July, I went
back to Cambridge. It obviously wasn't going to be
very long. The last job I did, was it the last? No, it
was just one interesting thing. It wasn't much to
do with oceanography, but the question was raised
about a year or 18 months before the end of the war.
The Combined Chiefs of Staff were told to produce a
plan for defeating Japan within a year of the
defeat of Germany, because it was thought that the
British and public would not stand the war in Japan
going on for more than a year after the defeat of
Germany, which seemed quite likely. And everyone
got in on this act in one way or another,
considering this question. It involved, first of
all, deciding when Germany was going to be
defeated, and secondly, deciding on a plan for
defeating Japan within a year thereafter. Well,
it was got completely wrong. It was decided that
Germany would be defeated in the late fall of 44. In
fact, they lasted six months longer, seven months
longer. And it was decided that Japan could not be
defeated within a year thereafter. It couldn't be
defeated by the fall of 45. And they were both
wrong. And it's very interesting, showing with
really very experienced, very intelligent
people considering these matters, you get it
completely wrong. on the effect of the bombing of
Japan. I underestimated the effects because I
didn't believe what the Air Force said. In Europe,
we'd always divided Air Force estimates by pi
because they were always over-optimistic. In
Japan, Japan was much more inflammable and they
really had done much more damage than the same
weight of bombs in Europe. We discounted the We
also thought it would take longer to develop
airfields on the islands when they were captured
than it actually did because it involved
bulldozing the tops off all the hills to set up
airfields. We discounted the effects of the atom
bomb because we didn't believe it were ready in
time. We didn't think the first test would work. We
thought it would all take longer. And so he said for
planning purposes one should not assume it would
work. So it is a very odd thing and interesting.
It's nothing to do with oceanography, but it's
interesting how really the best and most careful
consideration by the military experts and their
civilian advisors arrived at completely wrong
answers. Well, now, we've now reached the end of
the war. But I have a couple of questions I want to
ask you before we reach totally upon the end.
When you're working in terms of gravity
experiments on submarines, Was
this involved in warfare? No, not at all. I didn't
think so. There was no military application at all
at the time. It has certain applications now, but
that's nothing to do with what we're talking about
now. There are questions of the trajectories of
ballistic missiles. The calculation of those
involves a knowledge of variations of gravity.
But at the time we were doing it, it had no military
application. And when you were in charge of
degassing in terms of mines, did you not in turn
invent a kind of mine which was much more
effective? Yes. Where did you hear that? Oh, I
just... Where did you pick that up? Roger Revelle.
Yes, that's true. This man, Ben Brown, whom I
talked about before as the man who measured
gravity in submarines, he stayed in the
anti-submarine establishment. He suffered
fools much more gladly than I did. And he stayed
there. And he and I, between us, I think I
originally invented it, and he did some
experiments to see whether it was practical. We
invented a pressure mine, which worked when a ship
goes over an object on the bottom, there is a
reduction of pressure as it goes over. And we
invented a mine which worked this way. Well, it was
decided to be too dangerous for us to use it because
we had no means of sweeping it. I put a lot of work
into developing methods of sweeping with no
success and so it was really a very dangerous thing
and it was decided not to use it. It was used, the
Germans must have invented it independently, it
was used right at the end of the war in the Scheldt
Estuary out when they evacuated Holland and it was
used extensively by the Americans in the last
stages of the Japanese war. Now when you go back I
don't know whether the American invention was
independent. I think not. Well, my impression is
it was not. That was a conversation I drew from
Ravel. Well, I think that's only because I told
Ravel I thought it was not independent. Okay.
After you leave and affect the War Office and...
The Admiralty. The Admiralty, rather, and you go
back to Cambridge, you list yourself as a reader in
geophysics. Well, I started off Yes, that's
right. I went back as a reader. Reader is the second
level. It's roughly associate professor. In an
English university in those days, there used to be
one professor in each subject.
Occasionally in a very large department there'd
be two, but there was normally only one professor,
and the other people were called mostly
lecturers. Lecturer is the normal grade of an
academic. One reader is a slightly superior
grade, and a professor is a very superior person
who runs the department. I never became a
professor in Cambridge until the 60s. I was in my
late 50s when I became a professor. You know, but
while I have you listed as a reader in geophysics, I
also have you listed working still for the Navy for
four years. Is that erroneous? That is erroneous.
always i've always been on naval committees after
the war advisory committees of one sort or another
but i uh did i've never been employed by the navy
since the war i left i left in somewhere about june
of 45. all right so then you you do indeed go to
cambridge i go to cambridge and i become a reader
and then we we started up again and i think in
retrospect I was rather incompetent. I didn't try
and expand the thing as rapid as I should. I didn't
try and get money as rapid as I should do. I think in
spite of everything, Rutherford's dislike of
collecting money to some extent rubbed off on me. I
wasn't nearly ambitious enough. And I didn't
press the university enough. And I got a lot of
graduate students. I mean, people wanted to come
and work. I got prestige by the wartime. There was
great interest in seismology. One of the first
things we took up was the use of wartime
explosives. And we had a project that was 6,000
tons of explosive, I think it was, in Heligoland in
a cave. And it was decided that it was dangerous to
get it out, and the Navy decided to detonate it. And
I heard about this and decided to organize a large
scale seismological operation to observe this
explosion. And we managed to find all kinds of
other dumps of surplus explosive and let them off.
I mean, a few hundred tons here and there. And so in
Germany, where it was easy to do anything in
Germany, just after the war, of course, we were the
heron folk. We couldn't do anything. We bloody
were light. And so we went around blowing up bits of
Germany and blew up Heligoland. The first time I
met the environmental movement, there were a
whole lot of people who said we frightened the
birds on Heligoland. Heligoland was some kind of
bird sanctuary. So we took a cinema film. of the
operation. And when we let off the 6,000 tons on the
island in this cave, all the birds flew off. They
all got up and they circled around for about a
quarter of an hour and sat down again. And that's
all that happened. Well anyway, I had a graduate
student looking after this and it was very
interesting seeing Germany immediately after
the defeat. You know, the complete collapse of
their view of themselves as the heron folk. None of
them knew what to do or what they wanted to do, and
they just waited to be told. And I remember I had
meetings, I went to the
Göttingen, where there was a man called Bartels,
who was a very well-known German geophysicist,
who I'd taken something of his life to. a supporter
of the Nazi party. When I went to see him, one of the
offices still had a picture of Goebbels in it. And I
thought Mr. Bartels, well, that was either a crook
or a knave. And then, he was very nice to me, of
course, and very anxious to collaborate in this
blowing up of Helga Land. Of course, to any
scientist who had had a motor car, we fitted it out
with tyres in order that they could take
instruments around and set them up for us. So there
was a good deal of a head out of us, and also there
were certificates, we supplied certificates to
people that they went Nazis. So there was a good
deal of enthusiasm working for us. And we got very
good collaboration from them. A very curious
thing happened. They said, would you like to see
the Gauss? place where Gauss made his magnetic
observations. And I said, yes, I'd very much like
to see it. So we went out with Bartels and his
various henchmen, lovely summer day of 45,
through the woods. And there was a little wooden
hut where Gauss made his magnetic observations a
hundred and something years before. And I went up,
opened the door and go in, and found it was locked.
And they said, oh, the door is locked. It is locked
to Schlosser. And I said, yeah. And Schlosser And
they said, no, it gives consciousness. There was
no key. And so I said, and it's not a rat. And I said, I
wish to see the interior of this building. And they
said, there is no key. And I said, well, please
break the door in. And I sat down on the doorstep and
waited for them to break the door in. And then I
produced a key from his pocket and opened it. I
walked in, completely empty hut, nothing
whatever there, except a little table against one
wall. a vase of fresh flowers on it, and a picture of
some Nazi tough over it. They'd made a little
shrine there. And imagine the stupidity of taking
me out there on the off chance that I wouldn't smell
a rat. But it's very interesting, you see, there
was no question, as soon as I said I wish this door to
be broken in, there was no question at all of
opposing me in any way. I didn't say anything, I
didn't tell anyone, I just told them I thought
they'd better get it removed.
Very odd, indeed. I went, I don't know whether the
stories of this sort are at all relevant to you.
Right, right. A little later, it must be later the
same year, I think, I went over again, and I went,
was it Goettingen again? I'm not sure. It was some,
I've forgotten now where it was exactly, but the
Erdenamische Versuchsanstalt of the Luftwaffe
were there, the Luftwaffe's research
establishment. No, this was later. This was a year
or so later. Sorry, this story comes a little
later. I became disenchanted with the department
in Cambridge. The thing that finally tipped it was
that I had a typist coming in two afternoons a week.
And I wanted her every afternoon, and the
university refused. Well, I'd explained to them
before I came back to Cambridge and became a reader
that geophysics was going to be an expensive
operation. And then when they refused to let me
have a typist half time, I felt this was not
reasonable. And that afternoon, a man came in who
asked me whether I would take a job in Canada as head
of the physics department in Canada. Well, this
was the largest physics department in the British
Empire and Obviously a prestigious job with a very
good pay, paid $10,000 a year, which is a lot of
money in those days. And so I took this job. I knew I
didn't want it, and I knew I wasn't going to like it.
But I was so annoyed at having been turned down over
this typist that I took the job. And I went out to
Canada, my wife and four children. And my wife took
an enormous dislike to Canada and wouldn't stay
there. And I rather wanted to get out too. I think,
in other circumstances, if my wife hadn't
disliked it, I'd probably have stayed. I don't
know. I think I'd probably come down here because I
came down, while I was in Canada, I came down here
for the summer and was offered the directorship of
scripts before Ravel got it. And I decided against
it. Of course, my wife wanted to get back to England
and I wanted to get back to England. And I went and
saw President Sproul and recommended Ravel. And
there was a good deal of opposition to Ravel down
here. And I told him to overrule it and then the
locals would settle down and make Ravel
directives. He did. Well, anyway, so I had this
short time in Canada. And during that time in
Canada, I came down here for the summer. In the
summer of 49, I spent down here. And I got an
enormous amount done in this period. I built an
apparatus for measuring heat flow down here,
working with Art Maxwell, who's now Deputy
Director of Woods Hole, and who was then a graduate
student here. And it's interesting looking back
that there was not enough workshop effort to get
the machine built. It wasn't a very complicated
thing. And so I said that Maxwell and I would build
it, and we worked in the workshop. And I spent a good
deal of the summer working in the workshop here,
making this apparatus, which we just got finished
at the end. We didn't get any measurements with it
that summer. But we got it built, and we showed that
it would work, and everything was all right. And I
went home and built another one, and that gave
measurements. And Maxwell built another one
here, slightly different, and that worked. So I
did that that summer. I also wrote a long paper on
the Earth's magnetic field, on the westward drift
of the Earth's magnetic field. And I started to
think about the origin of the Earth's magnetic
field. I'd started to think about it just before I
left England. I did a lot of work on that while I was
in Canada and while I was down here. And in
retrospect, I think this was my most prolific
period, the time in Canada and the time down here in
the two or three months in the summer of 1948. And
then, in the course of all this, I got offered the
job of Director of the National Physical
Laboratory and very foolishly I took that. It was a
lousy job in many ways and the Lord didn't intend me
for a civil servant. And I got along alright. I got a
good deal of my own work done actually and I
directed the lab without any major scandal
occurring and I think I cheer the place up a bit. It
was rather a depressing, slow-moving place and I
think I got a certain amount done and I became... I
remember thinking one day, what can the director
of this place do? What influence has he got?
There's a large staff, something like 1,500
people. What can you do as director of the
establishment? And I decided there were only two
things you could do. First of all, you could
interview everyone they hired of a scientific
kind so as to make sure you did hire bright people
and not merely people who wouldn't be a nuisance.
And so I insisted on interviewing every single
scientific officer who came into the place. And
secondly, we have large controlled budgets. And
in effect, I was being given a lump of money. And so
things I thought went doing well, because they
weren't being well run, I could starve them of
money. And use the money to reinforce success, so
to speak, and not to boost up failure. And so on the
whole, I think I did a certain amount of good to that
show. Well, I stayed in Canada two years, and I
stayed six years at the National Physical Lab. I
went there at the beginning of 1951, I think.
And I stayed there till the end of 1955, which is six
years. Let me just get this right. I came to Canada
in March 48, and I left at the end of 49, that's
right. So I went to the National Physical Lab in
January 50, and I stayed till December 56, which is
six years. And then I went back to Cambridge. By
this time, this man Brown, had taken over as head of
the department and reader. He wasn't a professor.
He took over as reader. And I went back as the bottom
man on the totem pole. I didn't become a reader. I
went back as an assistant director of research,
which was more or less the bottom man on the totem
pole. And it was regarded as highly eccentric. I'd
left one of the prestigious scientific jobs of the
world to go back as something a little less than a
lecturer. It was extremely successful for me
personally.
I could do what I liked. I could get on with my own
work again. I could have work with graduate
students. I was paid very little by the
university, but I made it up by consulting. I
became a consultant to Shell and a consultant to
Rio Tinto. And in the first year, I made a great deal
more money than I ever made as director of the
National Physical Lab. So that was extremely
satisfactory.
I also had you listed as director of IBM while you
were- Yes, well, I tell you, I became a consultant
at Shell. And I was a consultant at Shell for a long
while, I mean, until the 60s. I left the NPL in 56,
and I remained a consultant at Shell for six or
eight years. And I then found, I used to go over to
Holland about once or two months, once a month. and
talked to the research lab on exploration
production there, go round and look at things, and
I got all bored with it. They knew what I'd say, and I
knew what they'd say, and I felt I wasn't having
much effect. I think I ought probably to have spent
more time on their affairs and been more
insistent. But anyway, I gave them six months'
notice to terminate the country. And I didn't know
what I was going to do. I didn't know what other job I
knew I would take up something else with industry.
And suddenly one day I was offered a job as director
of IBM in England. This was a tremendous success. I
enjoyed IBM enormously. They felt they'd like to
have somewhat, most of the board of IBM UK were
financiers. They were bankers from whom people
borrowed money, accountants, merchant bankers,
this kind of thing. and a number of employees of the
company, and they thought they'd like to have
someone different. And I don't know quite why they
selected me, but it just suited me. Is this the
first time you've become involved with
computers? No, I'd been interested in computers
all along. One of the earliest computers was built
at the National Physical Lab while I was there. I
knew Jonathan Neumann when I was in Canada. We'd
set up a computing center there with one of the
first computers. I'd been down to see Jonathan
Neumann, who was building one of the first ones.
I'd seen something during the war of the
cryptographic computers, whose existence has
recently been revealed. So I was deeply
interested in computers, and I was practically
the only man on the board in anything about them.
It's been suggested that you were in the vanguard
of placing computers into British science. Would
you agree with that statement? certainly I was one
of the first people who took them seriously in
geophysics I mean computers are used for two
things in science one is data analysis if you've
got a subject like astronomy or geophysics where
there's an enormous amount of information badly
contaminated with noise then you need a computer
to analyse the data and I was certainly early in
this business I did a lot of the early programming
for
recording data on board ship and then analyzing it
after you got home. Now, of course, you do the
analysis as well at sea because you have the
computers at sea. But at that time, the computers
were on land and you brought the data back on paper
tape and put it into the computers. And I did a lot of
programming and experimental work on data
analysis in oceanography.
This I... when I got back to Cambridge, I used to
visit here in the summer from the late 50s onwards.
And I worked here with Walter Monk and Flicka down
the corridor, Flicka Dolma, Flicka Oglebay as it
was, on general programs for analyzing data. So I
think I did have substantial influence on the
adoption of computers for data analysis in
geophysics. And the other side of the use of
computers in science is their use for analyzing
models. If you have a phenomenon, say an ice age or a
tsunami or something of this sort, or the tides,
then you have a theory of it. And your theory is a
simplified model of reality. And you want to
predict what this model will say about the
observations, about what should happen, and then
compare what actually happens and what the theory
gives. And this is quite a different sort of
computing. It's solving differential equations
and things. And I haven't... I did some of this in
the magnetic field business, the origin of the
Earth's magnetic field. And so that I think on both
sides I did something. I was in that when I was at the
National Physical Lab. I started doing that.
Being director of the lab, I could get as much
computer time as I wanted... The National
Physical Lab, though, was not defense-oriented,
was it? No. Okay, I don't think so. No, it was
industry-oriented. It was particularly
standards. When did you first become interested
in heat flow? I first became interested in heat
flow in the middle 30s. I remember talking to
Jeffries about it. I was interested... I think my
first interest was how reliable were the few
measurements we had. Wait a minute now, now my
first interest, Jeffries talked to me about the
shortage of heat flow measurements, there were
very few. I wrote a historical article on the
history of heat flow measurement. What had
happened was,
I've become, well, I think to go into the details of
Mr. Lee is really rather unnecessary, but Mr. Lee
was a graduate student here. And for reasons that
are too complicated to describe, I got him made
Secretary of the International Keep Flow
Committee when he was about 22 or 23, I suppose.
Enormously energetic man, determined to make his
fortune, his fame and fortune. And one of the
things he did was to start to get a collaborative
book written about heat flow from the earth to be
published by his international heat flow
committee. And he asked me to write a summarizing
chapter. And I refused to do it on the grounds that I
couldn't be bothered to read all the manuscripts
he'd got. And he wrote to me a very fierce letter in
which he said he thought this was very
unreasonable. I just must write him an article. He
was clearly one of these people like Dick Field who
wouldn't take no for an answer. So I said I would
write him an article on the history of heat flow.
This was intended originally more or less a joke,
and I started to write a history of heat flow in the
17th century. And so I wrote an article on the study
of heat flow from the Earth in the 17th century,
which is rather surprising. Boyle was interested
in it. And then I decided to write this more
seriously, and I continued it up to the present
day. And I haven't got a copy of this here, I'm
afraid. But anyway, in the middle 30s, I'd become
interested in it. This was in the 50s sometime. I'd
become interested in the thing in the 30s. Of
course, Jeffries had pointed out how few
measurements there were. And I'd put a graduate
student onto it in about 36 or 37. And he was making
measurements in England in collaboration with
the oil companies who got some boreholes. And I did
some measurements in South Africa. And so I then
became, I became interested in the whole
question, how do you measure heat flow? How, what
sources of uncertainty are there? I became
interested in the effect of the topography of the
earth and distorting the heat flow and so on. And I
then also became interested just before the war in
the possibility of making measurements at sea.
And at that time, war was on us. I didn't get
anything done before the war. Then, after the war,
I tried to get Maurice Ewing interested. And
Morris Ewing had his own problems and couldn't
give me ship time. And eventually Roger Revelle
offered me ship time. But then when I got down here,
he wouldn't give me any workshop time. I think very
foolishly. And so Art Maxwell and I went into the
workshop here and started to build the equipment.
And I was very surprised that the workshop
manager, the head mechanic, wouldn't let us into
the store. And I thought this was very odd. It
turned out afterwards that there was a racket
going on. He was buying stores and running a shop in
town and selling them again. And, of course, we
were very liable to discover this racket, that he
was taking things away in the evening, because we
were staying much later than he was. So it must have
been a grave embarrassment to him. And shortly
after we left, this all came out.